---
tags: blog, thoughts, Development
title: Mapping Libraries
published: 11/14/2023 1:00:00
quicklink: MapstervsAutoMapper
---

# Thoughts On Mapping Libraries for .NET

I haven't ever been a big user of the mapping libraries for Dot Net. I don't know why it is this way, but every single time I have tried to use one, I always find their functionality very rigid and inflexible for my use cases.

This problem unfortunately also applied to my most recent attempt to utilize one of these frameworks.

## Mapping A DTO - It Should Be Pretty Straightforward, Right?

As noted up above, my biggest problem with these libraries is that they want you to use mapping in a very rigid, fluent pattern, using expression bodies.
This would be fine for me, except for the fact that I always end up running into edge cases where the DTO I need to map back to a domain object or vice versa has to use some special kind of logic involving a DbContext or some other complex object to facilitate the mapping.

I suppose this is to be expected, especially when working with a codebase where the architecture "could be better". But it probably also doesn't help that my code base makes heavy use of EF Objects and Lazy Loading, which is another issue in itself...

## So Which One To Use, If Any?
As far as mapping libraries go, I am more partial to Mappster than I am of all the other ones.

### [Mapster 🔗](https://github.com/MapsterMapper/Mapster)

The thing I like about Mapster versus AutoMapper is that it has a much more simplistic API (which is a double edged sword, I suppose) and it is also faster than AutoMapper (by a significant margin).

If you're curious to try out Mapster, I would recommend starting by looking at its github site. The developer for it has done a decent job of documenting it and providing a quick start.

Another thing I like about it by the way, is that it has support for working with Queryables and Data Annotations for quickly creating DTOs. This is a bit dangerous since it can result in a lot more dynamic code, but if you need to quickly get DTOs across an API wire, it's something to consider.

The only thing I dislike about the library really, is that you cannot use methods bodies in expressions:

#### This Won't Compile
````
//Pseudo C# Code
TypeAdapterConfig<ProductDto, Product>.NewConfig()
.Map(dest => dest.CategoryId, src => src.CategoryName)
.MapWith((dto, context) =>
{
// Get the DbContext from the MapContext
var dbContext = context.GetService<DbContext>();
// Find the category by name or return null
var category = dbContext.Categories.FirstOrDefault(c => c.Name == dto.CategoryName);
// Return the category id or 0
return category?.Id ?? 0;
//Error - cant use a method in an expression body
});
````

#### In the above situation, you either have to use a method to work with the expression body:

````
//Pseudo C# code
TypeAdapterConfig<ProductDto, Product>.NewConfig()
.Map(dest => dest.CategoryId, src => src.CategoryName)
.MapWith((dto) =>{ CategoryId(dto.CategoryName)});

int CategoryId(string categoryName)
{
    var category = someDbContext.Categories.FirstOrDefault(c => c.Name == dto.CategoryName);
    // Return the category id or 0
    return category?.Id ?? 0;
}
````
#### Or This Nastiness:
````
//Pseudo C# Code
TypeAdapterConfig<ProductDto, Product>.NewConfig()
.Map(dest => dest.CategoryId, src => src.CategoryName)
.MapWithExpression(context =>
{
// Get the DbContext from the MapContext
var dbContext = context.GetService<DbContext>();
// Find the category by name or return null
var category = dbContext.Categories.FirstOrDefault(c => c.Name == context.Source.CategoryName);
// Return an expression tree that represents the category id or 0
return Expression.Condition(
Expression.NotEqual(Expression.Constant(category), Expression.Constant(null)),
Expression.Property(Expression.Constant(category), "Id"),
Expression.Constant(0));
//Yes, Nasty
});
````

Again, a lot of this can be a result of doing some very custom stuff and/or dealing with what may not be the best scenario for using Mapster (or Auto Mapper, for that matter).




### [Second Runner Up  - Auto Mapper](https://docs.automapper.org/en/stable/index.html)

I don't mean to knock Auto Mapper entirely. It does handle simple cases of mapping domain objects / data objects to DTOs and the like rather well. It also has extensive documentation and a large following on Stack Overflow, so looking up ways how to use it are arguably easier than Mapster.

However, the biggest problem I still have with Auto Mapper is the performance. It also doesn't have a very straightfoward way to auto-generate DTOs, like the way Mapster pulls things off.

The other thing I dislike about Auto Mapper, is that it is very opinionated how to set up its Mapping. Mapster unfortunately also befalls this problem. 

Both of them require you do something relatively similar:


